Category: Puppy Stuff ¤
  Author: Shirley Chong ¤
   Title: Bite Inhibition ¤

   Well, the people have spoken!
   Following is the article about bite inhibition I wrote for a 
magazine article. It will also be incorporated into my (almost done) 
seminar workbook.

M. Shirley Chong
The Well Mannered Dog

	I was the kid who always tried to color inside the lines and obey 
all the rules, so of course I wasn't about to allow my brand new 
puppy, Fergie (another German Shepherd) bite. But when I watched her 
with Sheba, most of their play was mouth play. They played tug of war,
 they wrestled, and most fun of all, they laid face to face and jaw 
wrestled while making a singsong wrestling growl. I wanted in on it, 
too. I didn't get a puppy just so Sheba could have all the fun!
	I noticed that Fergie had bitten Sheba a little too hard a few times 
and Sheba had somehow taught her to keep her bite soft. I thought 
that I could probably figure out how to do it as well.
	The books said that if I let Fergie bite me or play tug of war, she 
would think of me as a littermate and try to dominate me. However, I 
could see that Sheba had no trouble at all maintaining her position 
as Fergie's superior. In fact, sometimes Sheba had to encourage 
Fergie to play by rolling over on her back and waving her front feet 
at Fergie. Sheba didn't make a big show out of being superior; as far 
as I could see, she simply assumed she was and Fergie went along with 
that. So did every other dog that Sheba met, even when Sheba was a 
dignified old lady of fifteen. Well, I could do that, too.
	For years it was my secret: I played with my dogs by letting them 
mouth wrestle with my hands. They never tried to dominate me and they 
only did it in play. I continued reading and found something 
startling: there were actual experts who talked about bite inhibition.
 When I read the description of bite inhibition it was exactly what I 
called "biting nice" to myself.
	So now I'm out of the closet. Not only do I play mouth games with 
all my dogs, I actually teach them to play mouth games and tug of 
war! This is all about how I do it and why I do it.
	From watching puppies and from talking to experienced breeders, I 
learned that its normal for puppies between about six and sixteen 
weeks old to be obsessed with playfighting. When two puppies of this 
age meet, they want to wrestle. At this age, Mother Nature has given 
them needle sharp puppy teeth, so they can really sting each other 
but they can't cause serious damage. I believe that the lesson that 
puppies learn at this age is the most important one a puppy can 
learn: how much bite is enough and how much bite is too much.
	Any dog, no matter how stable of temperament, can be pushed into a 
position where they feel they must bite to defend themselves. The 
difference between the dog that administers a good hard pinch to the 
tormenting six year old human and the dog that rips the six year 
old's face off is bite inhibition.
	The traditional methods of teaching puppies never to bite include 
things like scruff shakes, cuffing the puppy under the chin or the 
infamous "alpha wolf rollover." A very common complaint by people who 
use these methods is that the puppy turns around and bites harder. 
Two puppies playing together egg each other on by jumping on each 
other, poking at each other with their feet, and wrestling! No wonder 
many puppies come back and bite harder--their human is giving them 
every indication they should.
	How do puppies learn bite inhibition? By biting! Trying to teach a 
puppy bite inhibition without allowing them to bite is like trying to 
teach a child to ride a bike without ever letting them get on the 
bike. It just can't be done.
	How do puppies learn when they've bitten too hard? They give each 
other feedback. Just enough bite is rewarded with more play. Too much 
bite and the other puppy yelps and stops playing. It works for humans 
too: let the puppy bite and give a very high pitched yelp if there's 
too much pressure. A normal puppy will back off for an instant. If 
the human is a good actor, the puppy will do some self calming by 
shaking or sitting down to scratch or else apologize by giving a lick.
 It's often best to rehearse your high pitched IPE! or OUCH! in 
private before trying it out on your puppy.
	If the puppy comes right back and bites harder, give another high 
pitched yelp and walk away. Go somewhere the puppy can't reach you. 
The message: puppies that can't play nice play alone.
	Some people roll the puppy's lip over their teeth either to prevent 
biting or to promote bite inhibition. This is not as effective 
because the puppy has to learn to moderate their bite without the 
feedback of pain from their own nervous system.
	Very quickly, the puppy learns how much bite is enough to make the 
game fun and how much bite stops the game altogether. They bite and 
mouth but they do it in such a way that it doesn't hurt at all.
	Figure out how to initiate mouthplay with your puppy. It's usually 
pretty obvious--certain body postures, hand gestures, etc, will get 
the puppy to playing.
	There are times, though, when you'd really rather not be covered 
with puppy slime (hard to imagine but true). What you need is a 
signal to let your puppy know when not to bite. I teach this in a 
very methodical way, so that it becomes absolutely clear to the puppy.

	Get a nice, smelly, really high on the delicious scale treat, let 
the puppy know you have it and then close your hand over it. Let the 
puppy lick, snuffle, poke, nudge, delicately nibble and try to get 
that treat out of your hand. Eventually the puppy will give up and 
back away or turn their head away--CLICK and open your hand so they 
can get the treat.
	This is what I call Doggie Zen: to get the treat, you must give up 
the treat. It's the basis for most training--the foundation of "do 
what I want and then we'll do what you want." Learning Doggie Zen is 
the beginning of learning emotional control.
	If your puppy bites harder than is acceptable, yelp and pull your 
hand up out of their reach for a minute.
	The first few times you do this, it may take quite a while for the 
puppy to give up. Just be patient, smile and say NOTHING. The puppy 
will eventually give up. Practice this exercise several times a day 
and in as many different places (at home, in the yard, at the park, 
in other people's houses, etc) as you can find.
	Very quickly, the puppy will start to back away when they see you 
hold out your closed hand. Voila! You have a signal! However, you 
might prefer a verbal command. When the puppy is predictably backing 
up when you present your closed hand, it's time to insert the verbal 
command. Say "Leave It!" sweetly, hold out your closed hand, click 
(when the puppy backs away) and open your hand. Anticipation (which 
dogs excel at) will take over and the puppy will realize that the 
words "Leave It!" mean you're about to hold out your closed hand.
	When the puppy backs up well on the words "Leave It!" it's time to 
incorporate this command into new situations. When you go into a new 
situation, though, you have to go all the way back to kindergarten. 
The easiest way to do it is to sit down and SILENTLY place the treat 
on a chair next to you (assuming your puppy is large enough to reach 
the seat of that chair). Let the puppy try to pry the treat out from 
under your hand until the puppy gives up. When the puppy backs up or 
turns their head away, click and move your hand so the puppy can get 
the treat.
	The puppy will learn to back off a bit quicker than they did the 
first time. When the puppy is backing off when your hand goes over 
the treat, it's time to add in the verbal "Leave It!" to this 
situation.
	Then start a new situation by dropping the treat on the floor and 
covering it with your foot. Again, you'll have to go back to 
kindergarten and re-teach it. This time, it should all go just a bit 
quicker.
	Keep figuring out new situations. Keep going back to kindergarten to 
re-teach the "Leave It!" It will go just a little faster each time.
	By the time your puppy reliably backs away from you when you say 
"Leave It!" no matter what the circumstances are or where you are, 
your puppy will be about four months old. Now it's time to start 
incorporating "Leave It!" when your puppy wants to mouthplay. Start 
off gradually, using "Leave It!" to stop mouthplay once every ten 
times the puppy initiates mouthplay. Click and treat when the puppy 
backs off. If the puppy doesn't back off, walk away and give the 
puppy a time out. Over time, use "Leave It!" when your puppy 
initiates mouthplay more and more often.
	When your puppy is about six to seven months old, use "Leave It!" 
whenever your puppy initiates mouthplay. Don't give up mouthplay 
altogether, though! You worked hard to develop that soft mouth and 
it's like any skill that depends in part on muscle memory--it needs 
to be practiced to keep it fresh.

Copyright 1997 Meesoon Shirley Chong